---
title:  Parables of Growing Seed
date:  25/07/2024
---

`Read Mark 4:26–29. What is the primary focus of this parable?`

Most of the Gospel of Mark has parallels in either Matthew or Luke or both. But that is not the case with this parable. It is unique to Mark. The focus of this brief parable is the growing process. Jesus indicates that this is how the kingdom of God works. Humans have a part to play, but the real growth is the work of God. It is not an endless process. The story comes to an abrupt end with the maturation of the grain. Just so, the return of Christ a second time will suddenly bring an end to our world’s history.

`Read Mark 4:30–32. What is the important stress of the parable of the mustard seed?`

This parable stresses how something very tiny grows into something remarkably large. Mustard seeds measure typically one to two millimeters in diameter (.039 to .079 inches). The plant described here is probably the black mustard (Brassica nigra), which has tiny seeds (more than 700 seeds in one gram). While not the smallest seeds in the world, they are quite small, especially in comparison to the plant they produce, which can grow as large as three meters (ten feet) tall. Jesus notes that birds even nest in the branches of the mustard plant. This last reference is an allusion to Psalm 104:12, with an allusion to Daniel 4:10–12, as well. Psalm 104 speaks of God’s power in creating the world, and Daniel 4 represents Nebuchadnezzar as a great tree under which all the world finds shade and food.

The point Jesus makes is that the kingdom of God, which began very small, will become large and impressive. People in Jesus’ day may have looked down on the dusty itinerant preacher from Galilee with His band of disciples, but time has shown that His kingdom of grace continues to expand throughout the world.

`“ ‘And this gospel of the kingdom will be preached in all the world as a witness to all the nations, and then the end will come’ ” (Matt. 24:14, NKJV). Consider what the “church” was like when Jesus made that prediction. Why is this such a remarkable and faith-affirming prediction?`---

#### Additional Reading: Selected Quotes from Ellen G. White

Jesus taught by illustrations and parables drawn from nature and from the familiar events of everyday life. In this way He associated natural things with spiritual, linking the things of nature and the life experience of His hearers with the sublime truths of the written word. And whenever afterward their eyes rested on the objects with which He has associated eternal truth, His lessons were repeated.<br/>
One of Christ’s most beautiful and impressive parables is that of the sower and the seed. “So is the kingdom of God,” He said, “as if a man should cast seed into the ground; and should sleep, and rise night and day, and the seed should spring and grow up, he knoweth not how. For the earth bringeth forth fruit of herself; first the blade, then the ear, after that the full corn in the ear.” Mark 4:26–28. . . . He who gave this parable, Himself created the tiny seed, gave it its vital properties, and ordained the laws that should govern its growth; and He made it a living illustration of truth in both the natural and the spiritual world.—_Counsels to Parents, Teachers, and Students_, p. 140.

As Jesus spoke this parable, the mustard plant could be seen far and near, lifting itself above the grass and grain, and waving its branches lightly in the air. Birds flitted from twig to twig, and sang amid the leafy foliage. Yet the seed from which sprang this giant plant was among the least of all seeds. At first it sent up a tender shoot, but it was of strong vitality, and grew and flourished until it reached its present great size. So the kingdom of Christ in its beginning seemed humble and insignificant. Compared with earthly kingdoms it appeared to be the least of all. By the rulers of this world Christ’s claim to be a king was ridiculed. Yet in the mighty truths committed to His followers the kingdom of the gospel possessed a divine life. And how rapid was its growth, how widespread its in­fluence! When Christ spoke this parable, there were only a few Galilean peasants to represent the new kingdom. Their poverty, the fewness of their numbers, were urged over and over again as a reason why men should not connect themselves with these simple-minded fishermen who followed Jesus. But the mustard seed was to grow and spread forth its branches throughout the world. When the earthly kingdoms whose glory then filled the hearts of men should perish, the kingdom of Christ would remain, a mighty and far-reaching power.—_Christ’s Object Lessons_, p. 77.

[El] reino de Cristo no es como ningún gobierno terrenal. Es una representación de los caracteres de aquellos que componen el reino. “¿A qué haremos semejante el reino de Dios?” preguntó Cristo, “¿o con qué parábola lo compararemos?” No pudo encontrar nada en la tierra que sirviera como una comparación perfecta. Su corte es una donde preside el amor santo, y cuyas oficinas y nombramientos están adornados con el ejercicio de la caridad. Él encarga a sus siervos que traigan piedad y amabilidad amorosa, Sus propios atributos, a todo su trabajo, y que encuentren su felicidad y satisfacción en reflejar el amor y la tierna compasión de la naturaleza divina en todos con quienes se asocian. (Comentarios de Elena G. de White en Comentario bíblico adventista, t. 5, p. 1111).
